---
title: Circulatory Pathways
weight: 3
---

# Circulatory Pathways
There are two types of circulatory systems, open and closed circulatory systems. **Open circulatory system has** haemolymph as the circulating fluid and is pumped by the heart, which flows through blood vessels into the sinuses. Sinuses are referred as **haemocoel**. Open circulatory system is seen in Arthropods and most Molluscs. In **closed circulatory system** blood is pumped by the heart and flows through blood vessels. Closed circulating system is seen in Annelids, Cephalopods and Vertebrates. All vertebrates have muscular chambered heart. Fishes have two chambered heart. The heart in fishes consists of sinus venosus, an **atrium**, one **ventricle** and **bulbus arteriosus** or **conus arteriosus**. Single circulation is seen in fishes. Amphibians have two auricles and one ventricle and no inter ventricular septum whereas reptiles except crocodiles have two auricles and one ventricle and an incomplete inter ventricular septum. Thus mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood takes place in the ventricles. This type of circulation is called **incomplete double circulation**. The left atrium receives oxygenated blood and the right atrium receives deoxygenated blood. Pulmonary and systemic circuits are seen in Amphibians and Reptiles. The Crocodiles, Birds and Mammals have two auricles or atrial chambers and two ventricles, the auricles and ventricles are separated by inter auricular septum and inter ventricular septum. Hence there is complete separation of oxygenated blood from the deoxygenated blood. Pulmonary and systemic circuits are evident. This type of circulation is called c**omplete double circulation**.
